		ZOOM Exception Mechanism Design
		-------------------------------

The Zoom exception mechanism is intended to be the tools used by ZOOM modules
to handle exceptions in a useful way and provide the user with interfaces to
control how to react to problems.  It is not (at this time) intended to be a
mechanism for the user to hook into to define his own exceptions, although that
may come later.  Frankly, successful implementation and use by ZOOM modules will
be necessary to sell this structure to our users as potentially useful, anyway.

We need the mechanism "now" because we are trying to deliver at least two
packages which will have to be re-instrumented when the mechanism is finally
adopted.

This is not a "signal handler" mechanism, which could be used to establish
behavior for segment violations, arthmetic exceptions, and so forth.  It
would be nice to have this but C++ does not provide generic support for
those activities.  A **later** possibility will be to provide this support for
POSIX-compliant operating systems, and coordinate it with the exception
mechanism.


We need to be able to cope with the following realities:
--------------------------------------------------------

1 - Users will not, in every case, imbed calls into a try block.

2 - Frameworks will incorporate code from multiple users and in some
    circumstances cannot afford to abort the entire job if some rare path
    in one user's code blows up.  To the extent we can help with this, we must.

3 - Framework creators CAN be expected to imbed portions in try blocks, or
    set up behaviors for various exceptions, assuming we give them the necessary
    tools.

    In the remainder of this document, the "user" who sets things up is assmued
    to be such a framework manager.

4 - There is need for coordinated logging and related behavior.


To be able to satisfy this, the goal is to allow:
-------------------------------------------------

1 - The user should be able to specify, for a given sort of exception, whether
    she wants to:

    a -	Throw the exception via the C++ mechanism, thus aborting unless she
	in the framework or a lower-level user responsible catchs the problem.

    b - Invoke a user-written handler when the exception occurs, which may
	itself determine it is necessary to throw the exception.

    c - Ignore the exception RETURNING TO THE SPOT IN THE ZOOM MODULE
	THAT DETECTED THE PROBLEM.  This can happen with or without a handler
	being invoked.  Typically, the module will then return some approriate
	pseudo-value to the user.

2 - In cases where exceptions are to be handled or ignored, there should be
    a well-known way to get information about the existance of a problem,
    analogous to the errno mechanism in C.

3 - Explanatory strings should be associated with the problem at the point
    of origin.

4 - The exceptions are organized in a hierarchical manner, which uniformly
    applies one simple category philosophy that the users can understand,
    across the various ZOOM packages.


With this in mind, our mechanism has the following structure:
-------------------------------------------------------------


1 - Upon detecting a problem for which it would like to (potential) throw an
    exception, the module code will instead invoke the ZMthrow macro.

2 - ZMthrow takes as its argument a ZMexception object constructor, which
    has as ITS first argument a const char*.  The intent is for the ZMexception
    object actually do be derived from the base ZMexception class, and for
    the char* first argument to contain an explanatory message.  Particular
    ZMexceptions can also have construction forms taking a second string, or
    whatever.
    For example,
	ZMthrow ( HepTuple::ZMxCapture( "Column not found", name ) );

3 - The ZMthrow macro appends __LINE__, __FILE__, __DATE__, __TIME__ and
    calls ZMexcept.

4 - ZMexcept has signature

	void ZMexcept ( ZMexception x, int line,
				char file[], char data[], char time[]);

    It does the following:

    a - Places x.ZMexceptionId into a circular buffer ZMerrno.  Actually,
	constructing the ZMexcept object does that.  More about ZMerrno later.

    b -	Determines for this exception what sort of logging is enabled, and logs
	it.  Note that derived exceptions must modify the general logging
  	method if they wish to include information beyond the message and
	file/line/time stamp.

    c - Determines whether a handler has been established, and if so invokes it.
	The handler will be passed the exception object, and can be set up to
	also take the line/file/time arguments.  The handler returns a bool
	which if true will say to throw the exception.

    d - Determines (after any handler has been invoked) whether to ignore the
	exception.  It will do either
		throw x;
	or
		return;

5 - ZMerrno is analogous to the C/Unix errno mechanism, but allows viewing a
    history of the last N problems detected.  The interface is:

    a - ((creation somehow, specifying N))

    b - ZMerrno.write (int id);    // put on stack exception id.

    The user would not use a and b but would use:

    c - int ZMerrno.read ();       // read the last value on ZMerrno
	int ZMerrno.read (int k);  // read the last-but-k value on ZMerrno

    d - void ZMerrno.clear();	   // put a zero (indicating no current error)
				   // on ZMerrno.

    e - void ZMerrno.pop();	   // remove an entry setting the top to the
				   // previous entry.  For instance, if you
				   // have a loop in which some known ignorable
				   // happening places a value on ZMerrno, you
				   // can pop each one so as not to wipe out
				   // the history for others.

    Thus after the start, or after ZMerrno.clear(), the user can always find
    out whether any ignored exceptions had occured by doing
	if (ZMerrno.read()) { ... then something has happened }

    If we later incorporate signal handling, this ZMerrno stack is where the
    user can find out whether he has had his arithmetic error since the last
    clear.

    ZMerrno is pronounced "oops."

6 - The id 0 indicates no error.  Each upper 16-bit value is assigned to a
    module to avoid conflicts; the values starting with upper bit set are
    reserved for user definition at a later date.  The lower 16 bits distinguish
    the specific error.

    Each ZMexception object class has its own error id which is established
    (hardwired) at construction.

    The ZMexception codes for the upper 16 bits are defined in ZMexception.h.
    The lower 16 bits, for each module are defined in files with names like
    HepTupleZMexception.h.

7 - When a ZMexcept exception is thrown it does a ZMerrno.write(this.id).  Thus
    ZMerrno tracks these exceptions even if they are explicitly thrown and
    caught by the user outside the ZMthrow/ZMexception mechanism.

8 - Logging is discussed separately.


The user interface to control exception behavior is:
-----------------------------------------------------

By the way, this is an interface for the framework manager to use; the lower
level user would generally never establish handlers or ignores, and would
only use the ZMerrno.read() and .clear().

1 - To establish a handler for a particular exception type, say for
    ZMexceptCapture:

	HepTuple::ZMxCapture.handler ( myhandler );

    The signature of the handler must be:
	bool myhandler ( ZMexception x );

    Note that the handler has access to the fields of x including for all
    ZMexception objects:
		char* message;
		int line;
		char* file;
		char* date;
		char *time;
    and, for particular derived ZMexception objects, any secondary messages
    or other information provided to the constructor.

    The handler should return false to ignore the exception and return to
    the user code (from ZMexcept), or true to throw the exception after
    the handler returns.  The user can also throw an exception explicitly
    in the handler.

2 - You may establish a handler for an entire base class, which applies to any
    ZMexceptions derived from in that class for which no specific handler is
    established.  For example, HepTuple::ZMxNewColumn is derived
    from HepTuple::ZMxGeneral so

	HepTuple::ZMxGeneral.handler ( myDefaultHandler );

    will apply to HepTuple::ZMxNewColumn if that is ever ZMthrown.

3 - Note that if a handler is established for a subclass it takes precedence
    over that for the base class.  If you instead wish to call the base class
    handler after executing the specific handler, you must invoke it explicitly.
    Only if no handler has been established will the exception check for and
    invoke a handler in its base class automatically.

4 - The user can tell the system to whether or not to ignore an unhandled
    ZMexception:

	HepTuple::ZMxCapture.ignore()
	HepTuple::ZMxCapture.dontIgnore()

    The default is don't ignore -- meaning throw the exception unless a handler
    is invoked and comes back false.  The same rules for inheritance apply as
    in the handler case:  If you haven't specifically said anything about a
    subclass, then what you have said about the base class will apply.  Thus
    calling dontIgnore() is NOT the same as not calling ignore().

5 - Sometimes you may want to ignore an exception the firt N times and then
    react differently.  The handler can have a static count variable to
    implement this behavior.



The part of the interface seen by non-framework-manager users is simpler:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

1 - The ZMerrno methods may be used to see if (ignored) exceptions have
    happened.  Typically, the user used to Unix exceptions would call
    ZNerrno.read() and maybe ZMerrno.clear().

2 - The ordinary user can try, and catch, these ZMexceptions.  We ask that
    usrs not throw ZMexceptions that the ZOOM modules throw.  Later we may
    extend support to include user-defined subclasses of ZMexception.

3 - When an exception occurs and is not ignored, the user will know the
    message given for the exception, as well as the and line number where the
    ZMthrow macro was invoked.  This is inside ZOOM code.  By doing
    debug core <usersource> the user can get a traceback into the user
    routines to find which line of his code encountered the problem.

4 - The status of what was set up for ignoring and handling may be probed, so
    temporary control be havior can be set and then put back to what it was:

	GetHandler() returns the estabished handler (and we have to decide how
	to cope with the two different handler signatures!!).

	int ignoreStatus();  //  1 - ignore was specified
			     // -1 - dontIgnore was specified
			     //  0 - neither was specified; use status from
			     //      parent
	void setIgnoreStatus(int);


Logging is handled as follows:
------------------------------

1 - Every individual ZMexception object can have a method for creating
    (from the other arguments aside from messge) a string to put into a log.
    (Of course, it may be inherited from its base class.)  But the message
    as well as time, line, id, and so forth is not to be handled by each;
    instead, ZMthrow handles this.

    The method to create the string is logMessage().

2 - ZMexception has a method log(filename) which will open a log to that file
    for that type of exception.
	bool ZMexception::log(const char filename[]);
    This will (if it is not already open for logging) open the file FOR APPEND
    and establish that file as a logging point for exceptions of this class.
    (This is class static information.)

    The bool returned should be checked.  It can be false for two reasons:  The
    file cannot be opened for append, or the file is already open for some
    other purpose.  (If it is already opened for logging, that is fine; this
    ZMexception will also log its messages there.

3 - If no logging is specified for a class the file defaults to the base class.
    Thus HepTuple::ZMxCapture might log to the file for HepTuple::ZMxGeneral,
    or if no logging is established there, for ZMexception.  It is possible (the
    default) that no logging is established anywhere.

4 - You may log to multiple files; each ZMexception (sub)class has a class
    static linked list of log files.

5 - Aside from single files, you can also establish a "rolling log" pair of
    files:
	bool ZMexception::log(const char filename1[],
				int n, const char filename2[], );
    The way this works is that the first file is opened (still for append),
    and up to n exception instances are logged into it, at which point
    it is closed, renamed to the second file, and re-created (empty) for
    more logging.  A script can detect when this has happended and archive
    the second file if desired.

6 - If you wish to cease logging a particular exception type in general or
    to a particular log file, you may:
	HepTuple::ZMxCapture.stopLog();
	HepTuple::ZMxCapture.stopLog(filename);
    If no exceptions are logging to a particular log anymore, that file will
    be closed.

7 - To be able to temporarily modify logging behavior for an exception, you
    may call
	int saveLogInstructions(),
    and later call
    	restoreLogInstructions(int).



The following usage recommendations pertain to writers of ZOOM code:
--------------------------------------------------------------------

As shown in the examples, place your definitions of the exception objects
inside the class definition for the class.  That way, methods within this
class can simply call the shorter name -- ZMxCapture rather than
ZMxHepTupleCapture.

Don't create too many types of exceptions.  The error codes appearing on the
ZMerrno stack are defined per each type, but unless you envision the user
needing to AUTOMATICALLY distinguish between one problem and another in
the same submodule via ZMerrno, don't define them as two separate exception
types.

In cases where the user interface promises a routine will not throw an
exception (but might return false if something goes awry) the ZOOM code
itself should enclose any possible ZMthrows in try blocks, to catch the problem
in case the user has not specified ignoring the exception.

Note that the argument to the constructor of the ZMexception in ZMthrow can
(and often will) be a string formed by concatenating some fixed informatory
message with some variable information, as in
	ZMthrow ( ZMxCapture( "Column not found", name ) );
To do this, one should have a constructor for that sort of ZMexceptoin object
with the extra argument in its signature, as well as the one with just a
const char[].  One could alternatively do someting like
	ZMthrow ( ZMxCapture( strcat("Column not found", name) ) );
but if you use the exception in more than one place, the recommended second
constructor is less work.

When returning a pointer, in circumstances where things have gone wrong, the
usual action is to return a null pointer.  In many cases this is appropriate,
especially if the user interface defines it.  However, the sloppy user might
cause an (uncatchable) bus error if he does not check for null pointer.
Consider returning a pointer to a braindead object (whose methods throw
ignorable ZMthrows) rather than NULL -- then the job might not abort.

